you
in this lecture we're going to talk
about how to instantiate a vector space
model so that we can get a very specific
ranking function so this is to continue
the discussion of the vector space model
which is one particular approach to
design ranking function and we're going
to talk about how we use the general
framework of the vector space model as a
guidance to instantiate the framework to
derive a specific arranging function and
we're going to cover the simplest
instantiation of the framework so as we
discussed in the previous lecture the
vector space model is really a framework
it didn't didn't say as we discussed in
the previous lecture vector space model
is really a framework it doesn't say
many things so for example here it shows
that it did not say how we should define
that I mentioned it also did not say how
we place a document a vector English
space he did not say how we place a
query vector in this vector space and
finally he did not say how we should
measure the similarity between the query
vector and the document vector so you
can imagine in order to implement this
model we have to say specifically how we
compute these vectors what is exactly X
I and what is exactly why I this would
determine where we place a document
vector where we place a query vector and
of course we also need to say exactly
what should be the similarity function
so if we can provide a definition of the
concepts that would define the
dimensions and these x i's or Y eyes
and then the weights of terms for query
and document then we will be able to
place directors and query vector
in this way define the space and then if
we also specify similarity function then
we'll have where define the ranking
function so let's see how we can do that
and think about the simplicity
instantiation actually I would suggest
you to pause the lecture at this point
spend a couple minutes to think about it
suppose you are asked to implement this
idea you've come up with the idea of
vector space model but you still haven't
figured out how to compute these vectors
exactly how to define the similarity
function what would you do
so think for a couple of minutes and
then proceed so let's think about some
simple ways of instantiating this vector
space model first how do we define the
dimension where the obvious choice is to
use each word in our vocabulary the
defining that I mention and who issue
that there are n words in our vocabulary
therefore there are n dimensions each
word defines one dimension and this is
basically the bag of words with
temptation now let's look at how we
place vectors in this space again here
the simplest strategy is to use a bit
vector to represent both the query and a
document and that means each element the
X I and why I would be taking a value of
either 0 or 1 when it's 1 it means the
corresponding word is present in the
document or in query when it's 0 it's
going to mean that it's absent so you
can imagine if the user typed in a few
words in the query then the
queer effect that we only have a few
ones many many zeros the Dakin the
vector generally we have more ones of
course but it will also have many zeros
since the vocabulary is generally very
large many words don't really occur in
any document many words we only
occasionally occur in the document a lot
of words will be absent in a particular
document so now we have placed the
documents and the query in the vector
space let's look at how we measure the
similarity so a commonly used to
similarity measure here is dot product
the dot product of two vectors is simply
defined as the sum of the products of
the corresponding elements of the two
vectors so here we see that it's the
product of x1 and y1 so here and then X
2 multiplied by Y 2 and then finally
eggs and multiplied by Y N and then we
take a son yeah so that's the dot
product now we can represent this in a
more general way using a sum here so
this is only one of the many different
ways of measuring the similarity so now
we see that we have defined the
dimensions we have defined the vectors
and we have also defined the similarity
function so now we finally have the
simplest vector space model which is
based on the bit vector reconditioning
dot products in our day and bag-of-words
recommendation and the formula looks
like this so this is our formula and
that's actually a particular retrieval
function a ranking function right now we
can finally implement this function
using a program learning it
then rank documents for appearing now at
this point you should again pause the
lecture to think about how we had
interpreted school so we have gone
through the process of modeling the
retrieval problem using a vector space
model and then we make assumptions about
how we place vectors in the vector space
and how we define the similarity so in
the end that we've got a specific
electrical function shown here now the
next step is to think about whether this
material function actually makes sense
right can we expect this function to
actor to form where when we use it to
render documents for users queries so
it's worth thinking about what is this
value that we are calculating so in the
end we'll get a number but what does
this number mean is it meaningful so
spend a couple of minutes to think about
that and of course the general question
here is do you believe this is a good
random function what did they actually
work well so again think about how to
interpret this value is it actually
meaningful does it mean something so
related to how well the document matches
the query so in order to assess whether
this simplest the vector space model
actually works well let's look at an
example so here I show some sample
documents and a simple query the query
is news above the presidential campaign
and we have five documents here they
cover different terms in the query and
if you look at the these documents for a
moment you may realize that some
documents are properly relevant and some
others are probably not relevant now if
I ask you to rank these documents how
would you rank them
this is basically our ideal ranking like
when humans can examine the documents
and then try to rank them now so think
for a moment and take a look at this
slide and perhaps by pausing the rapture
so I think most of you would agree that
t4 and t3 are probably better than
others because they really cover the
query well they match news-press genuine
campaign so it looks like these three
documents are probably better than the
others they should be ranking on the top
and the other three t2 t1 and d5 are
really non relevant so we can also say
p4 and d3 are relevant documents and d1
d2 and e5 are now relevant so now let's
see if our simplest the vector space
model could do the same or could do
something closer so let's first think
about how we actually use this model to
score document right here I shoot two
documents d1 and d3 and we have the
query also here in the vector space
model of course we want to first compute
the vectors for these documents and the
query now I show you the vocabulary here
as well so these are the n dimensions
that will be thinking about so what do
you think is the factory condition for
the query note that we are assuming that
we only use 0 and 1 to indicate whether
a term is absent or present in the query
or in the document so these are 0 1 bit
vectors so what do you think is a query
vector well the query has four words
here so for these four words there will
be one and for the rest to be 0 now what
about the documents it's the same so t1
has two O's news and about so there are
two ones here and the rest of
similarly so now that we have the two
vectors let's compute to the similarity
and we're going to use dot product so
you can see when we use dot product we
just multiply the corresponding elements
right so these two would be formal
performing product and these two will
generate another product and these two
which ended yet another product and so
on so forth
now you can easily see if we do that we
actually don't have to care about these
zeros because if whenever we have a zero
the product will be zero so when we take
a sum over all these pairs then the Euro
entries will be gone as long as you have
one zero then the product will be zero
so in fact we're just counting how many
pairs of 1 & 1 but in this case we have
seen two so the result would be two so
what does that mean well that means this
number or the value of this scoring
function is simply the candle of how
many unique query terms are matched in
the document because if a document if a
term is matched in the document then
there will be two ones
if it's not then there will be zero on
the talking decide similarly if the
document has a term but the term is not
in the query there will be a zero in the
query vector so those don't count so as
a result this scoring function basically
meshes how many unique query terms are
matched in the document this is how we
interpreted this scope
now we can also take a look at the d3 in
this case you can see the result is 3
because III match the three distinctive
queryable
News presidential campaign whereas dwow
only match the two now in this case it
seems reasonable to rank these three on
top of D 1 and this simplest of exes
base model indeed it does that so that
looks pretty good
however if we examine this model in
detail we likely will find some problems
so here I'm going to show all the scores
for these five documents and you can
easily verify they are correct because
we are basically counting the number of
unique query terms match the in each
document now note that this measure
after the makes sense right it basically
means if the document matches more
unique query terms then the document
will be assuming to be more relevant and
that seems to make sense
the only problem is here we can notice
that there are three documents D 2 D 3
and d 4 and they tied with a 3 as a
score so that's problem because if you
look at them carefully
it seems that d 4 should be ranked above
D 3 because these we only mentioned that
person is young once but the
aforementioned later multiple times in
the case of D 3 president you could be
an extended mention but if all is
clearly about presidential campaign
another problem is that D 2 and D 3 also
have the same score but if you look at
the three words that are matched in the
case of D 2 it matched the news about
and campaign but in the case of D 3 it
matched the news press ledger and
campaign so intuitively this reads
better because matching presidential is
more important than matching about even
though about and the president you're
opposed in the query so intuitively we
would like these reads we rank the above
D 2 but this model does
do that so that means this model is
they're not good enough we have to solve
these problems to summarize in this
lecture we talked about how to
instantiate a vector space model we
mainly need to do three things one is to
define the dimension the second is to
decide how to place documents as vectors
in the vector space and to also place a
query in the vector space as a vector
and third is to define the similarity
between two vectors particularly the
query left and the document vector we
also talked about a very simple way to
instantiate a vector space model indeed
that's probably the simplest of the
vector space model that we can derive in
this case we use each word defined by
mention we use the 0 1 bit vector to
represent a document or a query in this
case we basically only care about the
word presence or absence we ignore the
frequency and we use the dot product as
the similarity function and with such a
in situation and we show that the
scoring function is basically to score a
document based on the number of distinct
the query words matching in the document
we also show that such a simple vector
space model still doesn't work well and
we need to improve it and this is the
topic that we're going to cover in the
next lecture
you